I don't know if anybody watches the Great British Bake Off, but you know they always
have someone going on and saying, I've practiced this at home a bunch of times and I've never
made it in the time limit. I've practiced this talk three times and I've never made
it in 20 minutes, so buckle in. So, I'm going to be talking about stochastic
block models with R and how they can be used to do statistically rigorous clustering, but
with a lens of rigorous code. And I don't know if you read the actual title on the conference
page, but in my title with 11 words in it, I made three typos, so I'm getting there.
So this talk is going to be laid out kind of roughly into this organization of what
I'm selling, kind of every talk is selling something, the why, the process and the product.
So quickly just about me a little bit, can help to orient you a little bit. Previously
I've done some software engineering roles, primarily working with JavaScript, and I had
the pleasure of working at the New York Times in the graphics department for a while building
data visualizations. And currently I'm a Ph.D. candidate at Vanderbilt Biostatistics
and I focus on visualization and unsupervised learning. And in the future, I'm currently
looking for data science positions. I'm going to graduate in about four months. So if that
interests you at all, you should probably leave right now so I don't ruin everything
after this. Okay. So getting into what I'm selling, because
like I said, every talk is selling something and it's nice if they're a little bit more
up front about what that is. So I'm selling two things really. First is just that, a thing.
It's this package SBMR that I've been making that performs uncertainty aware, unsupervised
clustering of graph data. We'll get into a little bit of that jargon in a little bit.
But more importantly, I'm selling an idea. And that idea is that building an R package
alongside a research project can serve to strengthen both the package and the research.
So let's start with why. But first, I'm going to do a jargon break.
A lot of times you sit in talks, especially in modeling talks, and people throw out phrases
at you that you don't know, and then you stop listening, and that's no fun.
So first I'm going to define bi and polypartite networks and networks in general, because
I'm going to mention them a little bit. So bipartite networks or polypartite networks
are networks that have nodes of multiple distinct types where connections can't form between
nodes of the same type. So in this example, we have various pollinators and various flowers.
And you can draw an edge between a pollinator and a flower based on if that pollinator pollinates
that flower. So butterflies pollinate lilies and clovers. But you can never have a connection
from butterfly to moth, because that doesn't really make sense.
And then also stochastic block model. This is a phrase I'm going to use a bunch, and
I'm also going to abbreviate it as SBM. And this is simply just a network model that clusters
nodes into blocks of nodes. And these nodes are grouped by the similarity of their edges.
So in this example, we have this red cluster right here, and it's characterized by connections
within itself. So all of the nodes tend to connect to nodes that are in the same cluster.
The same thing goes for the blue. And all that needs to be known about a given node
is what block it is in and what the connection propensities of that block are.
So because I exist in academia right now, and if you don't show an equation in your
talk, people assume that you don't know what you're talking about. So this is just the
actual equation that governs this whole stochastic block model. And it's quite simple, even though
there's a lot of Greek letters going on. But basically, you just need to know the data,
which in this case is A, and that comes in the form of edges between nodes, which node
each group, or what group each node belongs to, and then a matrix of the expected edge
counts between those groups, which I was talking about earlier, is the propensity.
And then you might notice, if you're familiar with some statistical formulas, that this
looks very familiar. And that's because it's simply a Poisson model. So Poisson models
model counts based on a parameter that is the average expected number of counts. And
so in this case, the number of edges from a node to another node is governed by this
Poisson distribution, where the propensity or lambda value is what is learned in the
model.
So really why I showed this equation is that a few years ago, I got the Poisson distribution
tattooed on my arm. And I did that because I really just liked it. I thought it was a
cool, elegant distribution. And little did I know that I would be spending the next couple
years of my life intimately familiar and sort of hating the equation.
So why stochastic block models? So in my research, we lurk a lot with electronic health
records, or EHR data. And so with this type of data, questions that often arise are things
like, who are these people similar to and why? So we might go to a collaborator, and
they would have that question of, I'm interested in patients with type 2 diabetes. Can you
show me other patients that are similar to them and tell me why they're similar?
So the first thing that I tried was deep learning methods. So these worked well, but they had
a couple of problems. And one is that they lacked interpretability. It could tell you
that these nodes were similar to each other, but it wouldn't tell you why it said that.
You can get that out of the model, but it's a little bit hard. And it needed specialization
for these networks that have multipartite structure.
And then also, we wanted a method that acknowledges the limitations of the data. So statisticians
were very interested in uncertainty. And neural networks, again, there are kind of
ways that you can get uncertainty out of them, but they are not fundamentally built with
that idea in mind.
So next is, why would I write a package to do this? And so there's a package in Python
called GraphTool. And it fits stochastic block models. But there's a few issues with why
we didn't use it. One is that my lab that I work in uses R exclusively. So every time
I would show them Python code, people's eyes would glaze over.
We're also quite focused on uncertainty. And GraphTool is great, but it doesn't focus quite
on uncertainty as heavily as we would like. We also needed to tweak the underlying methods
to optimize it for these bipartite networks. And I wanted to present at RStudio conference,
and I couldn't do that if I wrote a Python package.
So we'll get into the process now. So with every R package and really every kind of research
project that someone does, you kind of got to get to the starting line. And honestly,
that's the hardest part most of the time.
And so for this project, there were kind of two things we had to do. And one was look
into possible graph libraries. So we decided we wanted to use R to do this graph manipulation.
So we looked at the elephant in the room is iGraph. And iGraph is a great package. However,
much like GraphTool, it does a lot more than what we needed it to. And I don't know if
you've ever tried to install a package that depends on iGraph, but it is a pain.
And also, we wanted to add these kind of computationally heavy steps, something we'll illustrate later.
And we had to do that in R by virtue of wrapping a package. And that kind of brought everything
to a halt.
And if you're more interested in kind of this tradeoff of adding a dependency versus writing
stuff from scratch, I'd really encourage you to look at Jim Hester's It Depends talk from
last year's RStudio, where he kind of talks about how big of a difference taking away
one dependency can make in the uptake of your package in terms of, you know, does it take
five hours to download or does it take five seconds?
So after that, we decided that we were going to use Rcpp. And Rcpp, as you might know,
is kind of a nice interface between R and C++ code. And it really just lets you write
C++ code to do what you want. And then you can wire it up to R extremely easily.
So this low-level interface kind of allowed us to get really close to the metal and keep
it nice and memory efficient. We didn't want to keep, you know, pull around a bunch of
extra data with our model such that we were wasting a lot of bits. And we also wanted
to make sure our processing was nice and efficient. We didn't want to, you know, waste excess
flops on things that weren't necessary for what we were doing.
So once you've kind of gotten a package started, the next step and, you know, in research,
the next step is doing tests. And so this kind of, I think about this in two ways. So
from one, we come from the software side of things. And software side of things, this
comes in the form of unit tests. So unit tests are these nice toy examples that you kind
of break the problem down as simple as possible. You try to probe, you know, the limits of
the problem, find the edge cases, and make sure that your software behaves as you think
it should. And so this can benefit the statistics side of things by building strong foundations
for larger models. If you're really sure that the model works in these kind of minimal examples,
you're going to be confident about it scaling up. And then it also builds intuition about
behavior. So, you know, kind of with these, you know, graph-based models, there's a lot
of intuition that goes on behind it. And when you kind of code those minimal examples, you
can gain that intuition pretty well. And then from the other side, when you do a statistics
methods project, a lot of times you have to build one. You really should be doing simulated
data. And so this can actually help the software side of things, I think, quite well because
when you have simulated data, it's stochastic by definition, and it's going to find your
edge cases, right? You will never be able to fully probe kind of the limits of your
functions with just unit tests. But stochastic data, if there's a bug that you found, it
will be found in, you know, one of the thousand times that you simulate data. This happened
many, many times. And it also gives you an idea of real-world performance, so you don't
kind of get sucked down a rabbit hole of thinking your stuff works really well when you have
maybe an O of N squared operation hidden somewhere that doesn't show up until you start using
big data. So kind of carrying on with the idea of speed,
the next step a lot of times is kind of speeding stuff up. This is more of a software side
of things. But one thing that you'll quickly learn if you start writing a package to do
modeling is that the exact equations that you read in a paper or whatever are not going
to be efficient. And so the example in this package is that we have this. This is the
entropy of the model, which is essentially as the negative log likelihood, if you're
familiar with those terms. Basically, we want this number to be as small as possible.
And one of the things that we do is we move a node to another group, and we test how much
this value changes. And if you do this whole thing, it's a very computationally expensive
task. But you might notice, if you kind of dig into it and tear the equation apart, you
know, different parts of it don't actually change, and so you don't need to calculate
them. We have this divide by 2 here because we're double counting using this formula,
so we can really optimize the equation. And by really digging into this, we actually
have to think about what's going on a little bit more deep than you might necessarily do
if you're just sitting there writing one off R scripts or writing math on a page.
So kind of taking a step back also for the test side of things, this documentation serves
as a test in a way, too. So as you write these, as you do this research, and you're
constantly updating your documentation over that process, it keeps you focused on the
big picture. And so this is nice because you don't, like I said before, you don't want
to, you know, get stuck right in the unit test, working little toy examples, open it
up to the real world, and then you start having problems where any time you run it with something
over 100 nodes, it takes a million years to run. And it can serve as an informal sniff
test for results. So this picture on the right is an example of I was, you know, working
with some data, and it kept on having these really big drops. And I was like, what is
going on? And it was actually dropping into negative values, which is something that shouldn't
be possible. And by digging into that, all my tests were passing, all of the different
tests, you know, all the behavior that I was thinking about was working. But I actually
found a bug in the logic of the code from looking at this. And I wouldn't have caught
that if I wasn't constantly updating the documentation and looking at how things were changing.
So another mildly selfish part of this thing is writing vignettes. And I think about this
right in the context of publishing. And so as a statistician or as an R developer, one
of the things that you really want is for people to use your stuff, right? That's how
you get tenure. That's how, you know, you get recognition in your field. And if no one
knows how to use what you're giving, no one's going to use it, right? And so vignettes are
a really great way to do that, kind of a nice real world example of using your package.
And then one of the nice things about this is that for people, if you're like me, and
you don't actually like sitting down and writing academic papers, this can trick you into writing
a lot. And so this kind of right here is an example of this is a single vignette from
the package. And, you know, when my advisor says, Nick, are you writing? I get to show
him that I have this nice long vignette. And I say, of course, I've been writing.
So now moving on to the kind of last part, which is the actual product that this whole
process has been leading up to. And so quickly taking a step back to reorient ourselves,
what exactly is SBMR? And that's a tentative name for the package. It probably will change.
It's not very creative. But it's a native R package, kind of, right? It uses C++ code.
But thanks to RCPP, it's essentially native at this point. And it's stochastic block models.
And its primary focus is investigating the uncertainty of the found structure by sampling
from the Bayesian posterior. So if you're familiar with Bayesian models, you can get
uncertainty by looking at the posterior distribution. That's how we get uncertainty in this clustering.
And it provides a growing list of visualizations to communicate the results. So this is the
link to the package down site for it. It's not exactly ready for primetime yet. But if
you want to go use it, there's a good amount of documentation written. And please report
all the bugs that you will find.
So with any package or any kind of method research product, there's, you know, you need
to know what you need to do to use it. And so in this package, you need really, I think,
a class of two things, two classes of things for what you need. One is data. So you need
data that can be represented as nodes and edges between those nodes, also known as graph
data. One of the examples that we use it for is patients with diagnoses. So you have a
patient as a node, and they're connected to diagnoses as another node. Another example
that we've used it for is a genotype for people. So you have a person and a genotype. A more
classic example is like social relationships and networks of, you know, friends on different
social networks. We don't currently support nondiscrete edges. And that's just because,
as you saw, the distribution that we're using is the Poisson distribution, which is a discrete
distribution. There are ways to extend it to nondiscrete edges, but we have not gotten
there yet. But those would be examples like correlation networks, where every node is
connected to each other just by varying amounts. And you also need kind of a mentality, right?
There's a lot of different ways to do clustering and unsupervised learning. So kind of to use
this method, you're going to want to have an interest in how and why your data cluster
together. This is kind of the nice thing about stochastic block models, is they're very transparent
in why you are clustering. So any given cluster is entirely characterized by its vector of
propensity to be connected to another cluster. And so if you have five clusters, every cluster
is characterized entirely by a length five vector that says how likely it is to be connected.
Any given node in one of the clusters is to be connected to the other clusters. And you
need a desire to understand how stable your clusters are. So if you just wanted to fit
a stochastic block model and you didn't care about using R, you could use graph tool. Currently
there are a lot more features there. But what we focus on especially is looking at
the stability of these clusters. So now with the few remaining minutes that I have, I'm
going to give a quick demo of kind of the workflow as you run through the package. So
first thing you can do is simulate a network. And I'm going to reload this page just because
this is an interactive network. And I feel like it's more interesting to see the nodes
you from what I'm saying. So we're going to simulate a pretty dense network with three
clusters of nodes and 40 nodes per cluster. And so we have a function built into the package
called sim basic block network. And we just give it the various values. There's a lot
more customization you can do. Right now I'm just keeping it at this default simple example.
And as you'll see, this is a very dense network, right? We have a lot of edges. And that's
actually one of the harder types of networks to cluster because there's a lot of competing
information. It has to do a lot of sorting to figure out what's going on. And as you
see in this force directed network, there's no clear structure in the data. There might
be a little bit denser region of blue nodes in the center. But if someone were to say,
can you cluster this by I, it would be pretty hard to do. But we know that there are three
clusters because we simulated three clusters. So the first thing that you want to do whenever
you're doing Bayesian sampling is if you're going to sample from a posterior, you want
to get as close to the optimal starting point as possible. And this is because when the
posterior sampling, you could spend a lot of time kind of getting to equilibrium. And
so you might be familiar with the concept of burning in a chain, which is where you
kind of let it run for a while until it finds its natural resting point. And then you start
sampling. But that's kind of an inexact science. And so we have an algorithm built into the
package that does agglomerative merging. So it basically takes every node, starts it
in its own cluster, and then slowly merges those clusters together one by one until you
have one node. And it records the model fit. So in this entropy value. And so higher value
is worse fit. And so what we're really looking for here is kind of the point where clusters,
true clusters start being merged together because the model says I have to take these
three clusters and merge them into two. So it had to kind of merge two clusters that
were not able to be merged in reality. And so ideally, there will be a sharp kind of
decrease, increase in model penalty for that change. And so we have this heuristic for
detecting that point, which we call the delta ratio is something that we've developed. It's
not particularly important. But we can see that right here, we've very clearly picked
out this point of three clusters, which is what we know. I drew a line here to say, you
know, we know that there are three clusters. How does it tell us? And so very clearly,
the model has said, I think that there are three clusters in your data. And so let me
choose that. And so we can do a sanity check because we know what actually generated the
data. And so conveniently, we actually perfectly separated our clusters, right? So this is
the simulated block of the node. And this is the inferred block. And so what we see
is that every single inferred block perfectly corresponds to the data generating block.
And this algorithm honestly works incredibly well. It's, you could really, if you wanted
to just do all of your inference in this model without going to the Bayesian values, you
could do pretty well. It does surprisingly well.
So once we have that kind of equilibriated posterior situation, we can do MCMC sweeps.
And so we can just pipe our model object to this function MCMC sweep, tell it how many
sweeps we want to do. We give it an epsilon value. And epsilon, in this case, is an ergodicity
parameter. So it kind of influences how random your choices of different nodes are. So, you
know, when a node is sitting and being checked in a sweep, how likely it is to be, you know,
given to just a random group rather than one that follows the data.
And we also have this interesting value called track peers here that we'll get into in two
seconds. But what we can see is that we have a very stable chain. And honestly, that's
because it's perfectly equilibriated, right? We know exactly where it is and it perfectly
fit there. And we get a little bit of variation as we go over our sweeps, as the number of
nodes moved. But everything is working pretty well.
So, you know, that's fine. But what we're interested in is looking at the uncertainty
in this clustering. And so when we do that track pairs option, what it does is it keeps
track internally at every single sweep. It says, you know, these two nodes, are they
in the same cluster internally? And then as we do our sweeps, we just keep tallying up
that value. And that gives us this kind of consensus matrix. And that will tell us, so,
right, blue is, you know, 100% of the time we were in the same group. And so we can aggregate
all of these MCMZ sweeps to get an idea of the kind of stability of our network.
And so this is an easy way to see it. However, you know, this is nice and got little nice
triangles here. And that's because we know the true structure. So what if we don't know
the true structure, so we can't sort it? Because if we didn't have this sorted, it would look
kind of, you know, it'd be hard to tell unless we knew the true sorting of the network.
So we have a new thing that we're calling consensus SNE. So you might be familiar with
t-SNE, which is t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding. We're calling this consensus
SNE. It's a totally made-up name that I just did today. But it's basically taking these
propensities and building a network between nodes where the node is connected to another
node if it is, you know, follows some threshold of connection. And so what we can see is with
our data, and I'll refresh this again, it perfectly separates itself into the component
clusters that we generated. And what you'll see is in, you know, less certain models,
there might be some connections between, so you get the hierarchical structure without
having to, you know, figure out how to sort your heat map.
So I have very little time left, but the future plans, we're going to focus a little
bit more on node-level uncertainty to allow us to try to find, you know, outlier nodes,
values that don't really fit the generating distribution that we've inferred. And we're
also going to just put a lot more visualizations. I've been working on this product for a long
time, and I have lots of visualization ideas, and I want to kind of start pumping them out
now that we've got the fundamental kernel going on. And just a quick thanks. So to my
advisor, Yao-Min Zhu, at Vanderbilt, lab biostatistician, Siyue Zhang, who's been
working with me on this, and the other lab members for their thoughtful comments during
the whole process. I'm supported by the Vanderbilt Biostatistics Development Grant. And most
importantly, my cat has been very helpful all the days that I banged my head against
the wall. While I couldn't figure out some bug, he was there, and I guess, you know,
my wife was there, too, to help me out. So thank you very much.
Thank you.